---
title: Binary multiplier
parent: Applications
nav_order: 2
---

## First training example: a binary multiplier

You've taken a look at the data and already constructed a network that at least has the correct number of input and output nodes. Will it be able to learn 16 multiplication facts? Of course not! The `2x2.net` you constructed has only 2 hidden nodes, and can therefore produce at most 4 distinct outputs (of the required 7). Construct a new `2x2.net`, as before, but with 3 layers and width 4 for both hidden layers:
```
3
4 4 4 4
```
The training algorithm takes many arguments:
```
./../src/train 
expected 11 arguments: netfile datafile items btfn beta gam epochs itermax gapstop trials id
```
The argument names exactly match the variable names in the C program. Here's what they are asking for:
* `netfile` << `2x2.net`
* `datafile` << `2x2.dat`
* `items` << `16` (number of data you wish to train with)
* `btfn` << `3.` (BTF-norm, used to set the BTF-margins as described above)
* `beta` << `.2` (time-step value of the RRR constraint satisfaction algorithm)
* `gam` << `1e-3`(RRR metric auto-tuning parameter)
* `epochs` << `10` (maximum number of lines written to the file for monitoring progress)
* `itermax` << `1e4` (maximum number of RRR iterations)
* `gapstop` << `.01` (RRR termination criterion)
* `trials` << `1` (increase this when compiling statistics from multiple runs)
* `id` << `test` (name for all the files generated by `train`)

Because of the last argument, `train` will generate the following output files:
* `test.cmd` (your command line)
* `test.gap` (file for monitoring progress)
* `test.run` (statistics when doing multiple runs)
* `test.sol` (the solution weights)

The file whose contents you will be following closely, even as `train` is running, is the "gap file", `test.gap`. For real-time reporting add an `&` at the end of your command line to put the job in the background. By doing
```
more test.gap
```
you will be able to follow the progress in long runs. The 2-bit binary multiplier application is so easy, `train` will have terminated by the time you get around to doing that. The complete gap file should look something like this:
```
         3    0.63613587    0.55792252    0.64555257    2.00700131    2.00700131    62.500 %     0.000 %
         7    0.28917853    0.43911374    0.46978192    1.28756702    1.28756702    64.062 %     0.000 %
        16    0.15349519    0.31768980    0.37626865    0.87848773    0.87848773    65.625 %     0.000 %
        40    0.12347367    0.18289424    0.30765258    0.59205003    0.56630854    73.438 %     0.000 %
       101    0.12159740    0.17687411    0.19909587    0.52520880    0.35032956    87.500 %     0.000 %
       252    0.05780539    0.10665988    0.10044701    0.29373600    0.23009609    84.375 %     0.000 %
       631    0.05448956    0.09306639    0.08987662    0.25398445    0.15553896    95.312 %     0.000 %
      1585    0.05765410    0.09512908    0.12523502    0.28574610    0.12876745    93.750 %     0.000 %
      3982    0.00343907    0.00408129    0.00714088    0.01291458    0.01001133   100.000 %     0.000 %
      4026    0.00221133    0.00248447    0.00637175    0.00984432    0.00984432   100.000 %     0.000 %
```
All the randomness in RRR comes at the start, when the weights ($w$), inputs ($x$), and outputs ($y$), are initialized. In `train` these are as random as possible: all are uniformly sampled between -1 and +1. Your `test.gap` will differ because of this.

The first column gives the RRR iteration count. If a solution had not been found after 1e4 iterations (the setting for `itermax`) the last line would have had iteration count `10000`. In this run `train` terminated at iteration `4026`, because the lowest gap, shown in column 6, had reached the value of `gapstop` (`0.00984432 < .01`). We see that the training accuracy, shown in column 7, reaches 100 % a few iterations earlier. The generalization accuracy, in the last column, is shown as 0 % because all 16 multiplication facts were used in training, leaving none to test generalization.

Columns 2, 3, 4 show the gap broken down into contributions from the three variable types (in alphabetical order: $w$, $x$, $y$). These have a root-mean-square (rms) interpretation. For example, the `0.63613587` at the top of the second column means that in iteration 3, this was the rms difference in the constraint $A$ and constraint $B$ projections of the weights. To put this number in context, recall that the rms value of the weights is 1 by our normalization choice. By iteration 4026 this number has decreased to `0.00221133`. The evolution of columns 3 and 4 is similar, as is the context ($x$ and $y$ are valued $\pm$ 1). Column 5 is an aggregate rms gap at each BTF, where contributions from $w$, $x$, $y$ are combined. Column 6 is simply the lowest aggregate gap achieved.

In all cases (columns 2-6), when the rms gap goes to zero it means the $A$ and $B$ projections are nearly the same, or that a variable assignment has been found that satisfies both constraints. `train` uses the *divide-and-concur* constraint formulation, where $A$ represents the independent constraints that apply to the trio of variables at each BTF and each data item, while $B$ is responsible for concur, or the matching of one BTF's output ($y$) with another BTF's input ($x$), and the matching of the weights ($w$) across data items.

Entries to the gap file are added on a logarithmic scale, that is, the iteration count grows by a constant factor from one line to the next (`train` computes this factor from the `epochs` argument). Condensing the evolution to 10 or 50 lines of output makes it easier to digest the progress. We will see convergence to zero gap on a logarithmic time scale also in the more challenging applications.

The solution weights are written to a file that has exactly the same format as the network file we created with `layered`. The only difference is that the weights in the third column are determined by the constraint satisfaction algorithm (RRR). Here is the top of `test.sol`:
```
17  5  4  60
    5    0   -1.28983434
    5    1   -0.00200875
    5    2   -1.29054248
    5    3    0.01983954
    5    4   -1.29245110
    6    0    1.29876608
    6    1    0.00954843
    6    2    1.29683942
    6    3    1.27723133
    6    4    0.00177617
    7    0   -1.29377298
    7    1   -1.28797003
    7    2   -0.00451735
    7    3    0.01376609
    7    4   -1.29115250

etc.
```
The BTFs at nodes 5, 6, and 7 (the only ones shown) are implementing 2-input AND/OR gates. The small weights have no effect on the BTF outputs, and the near equality (in magnitude) of the others implies they will act exactly as MAJ gates. In all three, one of the nonzero weights is to the bias input (node 0). The BTF at node 6 is therefore an OR, and by DeMorgan's rule, the BTFs at nodes 5 and 7 are AND gates. That's because every BTF $f(x)$ is self-dual, or $f(x)=-f(-x)$, so that

$\neg \mathrm{OR}(\neg p,\neg q)=\neg \mathrm{MAJ}(\neg 0,\neg p,\neg q)=\mathrm{MAJ}(0,p,q)=\mathrm{AND}(p,q)$.

Two kinds of symmetry act on the hidden nodes of layered boolnets. First, the nodes within each layer may be freely permuted (without changing the completely-connected, layered architecture). Second, because of self-duality, a boolnet's output is unchanged when the signs of all the incoming and outgoing weights, on any of the hidden BTFs, are flipped. This means that even when you expect unique solutions (say for a multiplier circuit), the weights in the solution file can and will come out differently from run to run because of symmetries. `train` calls the C time function to set the seed of the random number generator used for initialization.

Now that you know the basics of using `train`, there are many things to try, even for simple multiplier circuits. Try learning the 3-bit multiplication table, by constructing a circuit of only MAJ gates with the setting `btfn` << `3.` . The 64 multiplication facts are in the file `3x3.dat`. What are good candidates for the layered architecture? Wider layers, greater depth, both? After you succeed, you can try training on just a subset of the data, by setting `items` to a number less than 64. Now the generalization accuracy, in the last column of the gap file, will not be 0 %. Don't be disappointed when you find that you need to train on nearly all the data to get 100 % on the unseen multiplication facts. The complexity of multipier circuits grows almost as fast as the number of data. The right way to learn to generalize on binary multiplication is to put arbitrary-bit-length number representation into the model - something well beyond the scope of this tutorial! Generalizing in a different direction, experiment with larger values of `btfn`. Recall that larger BTF-norms correspond to smaller margins, or less constrained, higher information-capacity networks. You will find that with `btfn` << `5.` there exists a multiplier cicuit for `2x2.dat` with only one hidden layer of 5 nodes. From the solution file you will see that the BTFs are now implementing both 3-input and 5-input majority gates. Because `btfn` is only used for setting the margin, it is not required to be an integer. Fractional values are fine.
